Goal 1: Access to Language Archive Catalogs: Improving the quality and
quantity of conventional institutional data providers.

OLAC has ~30 participating archives, but many
have trivial collections of records or are only
represented via static repositories set up by OLAC coordinators 3-5
years ago.  From these archives, OLAC harvests ~30k records, but
the records produced by most archives do not fully follow 
recommended best practices and thus fail to score high on our metrics
of metadata quality.

Task 1.1: Improve the quality of existing OLAC repositories

+ background: report cards, as a performance incentive (or,
    public metrics as a form of peer review)
+ background: we have an OLAC metadata usage page that shows what
    metadata elements and values are in use
+ background: query logs; scale of query interest; precision/recall issues
+ vision: all OLAC repositories should have up-to-date catalogs
    that contain metadata conforming to best practice
+ task: adopt a recommendation document on metadata best practice
+ task: update the report cards to conform to the adopted recommendations
+ task: identify low-scoring archives, and work with them to
    improve the quality of their metadata, particularly the
    use of OLAC vocabularies; map vocabulary items; identify synonyms etc
+ task: develop an OLAC metadata usage note based on this experience
+ task: identify stale archives, and work with them to bring their 
    catalog up-to-date
+ task: analyze query logs to see what ???
+ task: develop automated quarterly report to be sent to curators to 
    remind them about the quality and currency of their metadata, and 
    inform them of the top queries pertaining to their archives.
 
Task 1.2: Improve the quantity of OLAC repositories

+ background: tailing off of new additions
+ background: large archives still not participating (APS, NAA)
+ background: list of smaller archives not participating
+ vision: all language archives should be in OLAC
+ task: compile a list of all known non-participating language archives
+ task: configure XMLmind to create a static repository editor suitable
    for use by small archives
+ task: contact all identified archives and consult to develop best
    strategy for generating their metadata
+ task: automatic scraping of HTML metadata, to show archivists
    their search results coming up; motivate them to improve precision
    and recall by mapping their terms to OLAC terms
+ task: work with these archives to expose their catalogue in OLAC format

Task 1.3: Improve the archival credibility of OLAC repositories

+ background: many so-called archives are not credible archives at all
+ background: archiving best practices change over time
+ vision: all OLAC archives should conform to current best practices
    in the treatment of their holdings (OAIS)
+ task: develop an OLAC recommendation document on this topic
+ task: refine OLAC's collection level description to include
    more fine-grained categorization of OLAC; where this is vetted
    by OLAC against published criteria (derived from OAIS reference model)
+ task: incorporate criteria into score card
+ task: generalize the score card mechanism to facilitate the addition
    of new measures over time (as best practices evolve)

Misc: Extend OLAC's collection level description to include the number
items held, not just the number of metadata records.

Misc: Improve search services, to drive the improvement in quality and
quantity of metadata

Misc: add an SRW/SRU layer to OLAC's service, permitting more flexible
access to harvested metadata

----

Goal 2: Access to Language Documentation on the Web: Extending
coverage and access beyond the community of participants by automated
cross-walking and mining.

The web contains documents in hundreds of languages; for the so-called
low-density languages, these materials count as primary language
documentation, and are of value to linguists.  Many language resources
are documented in HTML on the web, e.g. the online catalogues of major
language archives.  Linguists searching the web experience low
precision, because Google cannot support community-specific semantics
(e.g. "Santa Cruz" as a language name).  Many institutional libraries,
national archives, and other repositories document their holdings
using MARC or DC metadata.  Linguists experience low recall for these
materials, because many of these repositories are not indexed by
Google.

Task 2.1: Index all OAI content relevant to language documentation

+ background: OAI indexes a lot of material, including pre-prints that
    will be relevant to languages and linguistics:
    http://romeo.eprints.org/search.php?t=Linguistics
+ background: language and linguistic field not systematically
    identified
+ background: these materials are not returned in OLAC searches
+ vision: OLAC should index all OAI content relevant to langauge
    documentation
+ task: OAI-DC to OLAC crosswalk
+ task: identify relevant records
+ task: automatic enrichment of records (especially language id)

(NB This will quickly enlarge the content of OLAC, and give us more
pulling power for task 1.2.)

Task 2.2: Index all Z39.50 content relevant to language documentation

+ background: libraries hold many grammars and dictionaries relevant
    to language documentation
+ background: library catalogue search requires another interface
+ vision: OLAC should index Z39.50 content from major libraries
+ task: deploy Z39.50 gateway software on OLAC site
+ task: build MARC-OLAC crosswalk
+ task: modify OLAC search to group results by item not by location

Task 2.3: Serve all OLAC content back to generic web search engines

+ background: many people use Google et al to search for language
    resources
+ vision: users searching for language resources using a web search
    engine should find OLAC records and come to OLAC for precise searching
+ task: generate static HTML pages for all OLAC metadata (incluidng
    a pointer to the OLAC search engine for more precise searching) 


[out of scope?
Task 2.3: Index all web content relevant to language documentation
  (NB this presupposes the existence of a caching service, and I think
  we could probably use the text and audio upload service offered by
  the Internet Archive; this task encroaches on the
  Langgator proposal, whose outcome is not yet known)

+ background: "low-density" language resources on the web constitute
    important language documentation
+ background: much of this material only exists on the web briefly
+ background: texts (and audio) in an endangered language constitutes
    primary language documentation
+ background: work on automatic language identification (Hughes et al)
+ vision: OLAC should index (cached) web content in endangered languages
+ task: mine the web for low-density language materials and cache them
+ task: document the materials in OLAC metadata
]

----

Goal 3: Access to Digital Content: Curating new digital language
resources (both inside and outside the community) through
language-aware institutional repositories.

Most searches for language resources do not lead to an online version
of the resource.  Instead it is usually necessary to visit an archive
or contact an author.  Many sponsored language documentation projects
create resources that only reside in the investigator's computer.
There is some consensus about what comprises the inventory of basic
documentation for a language (e.g. EMELD and Rosetta index pages for a
language), but this should be broadened.  [More about DSpace.]

Task 3.1: Create DSpace modules to support language identification and
linguistic data.

+ background: language identification is the single most important
    thing that characterises a linguistic resource
+ background: this is especially critical for endangered languages--
    each relevant resource is highly valuable but without precise
    language identification it becomes another needle in the haystack
+ background: precision/recall problems with existing language-id,
    and the case for ISO 639-3 (refs)
+ background: management of ISO 639-3 over time
+ background: DSpace as a model for institutional repositories; uptake
+ background: OAIS reference model as ISO standard for digital archiving
    and Dspace as leading tool that comforms
+ background: if mainstream digital archiving tools use precision, then
    we automatically get precision when we crosswealk from DC to OLAC (as in 2.1)
+ vision: Users of popular instutional repository solutions are able
    to specify language id with precision
+ task: create an ISO 639-3 module for DSpace, including a flexible
    browser for 7000+ languages, with geographical, genetic, historical
    navigation
+ task: support ISO 639-3 as a vocabulary both for language and subject
+ task: advocacy in DC and DL communities (even general cataloging
    community?) for ISO 639-3 as a standard for language and subject
+ task: support for maintenance of the vocabulary over time.
+ task: set up a DSpace sandbox at the LDC, with user accounts,
    to permit the community to interact with the repository and give feedback.
+ ?task: Set up a production Dspace repository at GIAL that will serve
    as an example of an operational installation 

Task 3.2: Create an OLAC module for DSpace, and expand the DSpace
sandbox at LDC.

+ background: motivation for OLAC's other vocabularies
+ background: language resources are of many types other than documents
+ vision: Users of popular institutional repository solutions are
    able to install an OLAC module so that they can integrate OLAC
    metadata creation into the work-flows and life-cycles of their
    digital objects
{GS: I might approach this a bit differently.  I see it as a vision for
killing two birds with one stone: making it possible (1) for established
institutional repositories that now support only preprints would be able
to support digital language documentation as well, and (2) for existing 
language archives that don't have their digital act together to
adopt an off-the-shelf best-practice solution.  I'm not sure if that 
should be in a different vision statement, or belongs in background
statements.  You can take this input and adjust as you see fit.}
+ task: create an OLAC plugin???
+ task: add support for the ingest of best practice formats

Task 3.3: Support field linguists who must manage digital objects
offline for later upload.

+ background: fieldwork mode; creating resources while offline
+ background: importance of capturing metadata at creation time
+ ?background: importance of being able to periodically upload
    collected materials to the home institution for safekeeping
+ vision: Field linguists should be able to participate in all the
    above while they are in the field
+ task: add off-line ingest via DSpace, permitting a field linguist to
    prepare a SIP (including OLAC metadata) to be uploaded to an
    institutional repository.
+ task: build a downloadable package (including XML editor,
    stylesheets, schemas, and configuration files).


Misc tasks not yet incorporated

DSpace: link the language homepages in different DSpace instances, by
including OLAC search functionality inside DSpace?; set up a language
documentation template?

Language identification: Promote ISO 639-3 to DCMI; once adopted
encourage downstream adoption by DSpace, OAI, etc. {GS: I added this to 3.1}

DCMI: promote OLAC as a DC application profile, to encourage wider
usage of OLAC vocabularies.
